[Music]
Good day I'm Norman Wildberger we're on our way
to critiquing real numbers as kosi sequences of
rational numbers before we do that we have to
explain what a koshy sequence is and before we
do that we properly need to discuss more this
rather sensitive topic of what a sequence is
especially what an infinite sequences that's
what we're going to be tackling today in our
last video we talked about regular sequences or
finite sequences today we're going to see can we
make this jump from the finite to the infinite
well it turns out that we have to take great
care when we try to move in this direction these
are not just two different sides of the same coin
there's a vast Gap vast Chasm between the finite
and the so-called infinite in fact it's not at
all clear what we mean when we talk about things
which are infinite that's part of the problem all
right so to illustrate uh things what we're going
to uh talk today about our so-called infinite
sequences that come from uh Neil Sloan's online
encyclopedia integer sequences so last time we
talked about finite sequence like say the sequence
1357 stop or the sequence 2 4 6 8 and so on up to
1,146 this is not entirely completely specified
here because I haven't told you what these three
uh dots mean but if I explain in words and say
well it's all the rest of the even numbers from
eight up to this number here then you are in
position to recover the sequence with some work
so these are finite sequences and we feel that we
have control over what they are today we're going
to talk about the big step to these so-called
infinite sequences which arise in practice in
many many different ways and Fashions and
there's so much to be uh to be investigated
here as is made clear by uh Sloan's wonderful uh
online encyclopedia we're going to look at a few
entries from his uh his collection in particular
a 000040 which is this sequence here which is
the sequence of prime numbers and another one
probably less familiar to most of you a 00108
which is this particular uh sequence if you're a
com tutorialist you may recognize it but otherwise
it uh may appear a little bit unfamiliar it's
a rather remarkable and important sequence so
we're going to be able to talk a little bit about
General sequences in the context of these uh these
kinds of simple examples so I'm trying to raise
some of the issues when we try to be more precise
about what an infinite sequence really means of
course we in fact began this series of lectures
with an even more Elementary and more fundamental
sequence which was the natural number sequence and
we are using the word sequence here in an informal
way we have not yet defined what we mean by an
infinite sequence and in fact it's going to be
very problematic for us to do that as we'll see
nevertheless we talked about this pattern 1 one
one 1 one one 1111 and so on and a little while
later with some more sophistication we rewrote
that in the Hindu Arabic form as more familiar
1 2 3 4 5 6 and so on so there's a question here
the question is does this sequence really go on
forever or is this really an infinite
sequence that's not such a fasile question as it
might appear it's clear that when the numbers are
are small or reasonably small we can always add
one and get the next one but as the numbers get
bigger and bigger and bigger then theoretically
they are going to start getting so big that they
overwhelm our memory supplies that they overwhelm
perhaps the size of the solar system or the size
of the Galaxy or maybe even the size of the
universe at which point it becomes perhaps
problematic about whether this sequence actually
does go on forever or not in fact it's not even
clear what that means to go on forever so these
questions are seemingly related to physical or
metaphysical questions cosmological questions
such as does time go on forever is the universe
finite will mankind live forever and there are
other sort of related questions I mean if our
universe is finite that might be but there might
be other universes some Modern physicists like
to speculate about universes Beyond ours and in
some circles these rather fanciful Notions are
even taken seriously I think they should be taken
with a grain of salt but uh that's my opinion in
any case it seems reasonably clear that perhaps
the the the structure or the Poss structure of
something like this might be related or linked
to the physical world there are other people who
take a different position and say well no the
mathematical world is completely separate from
the physical world and even if the physical world
is finite then doesn't matter this the sequence
is still going on forever I'm not uh such a fan
of that point of view I happen to think that the
mathematical and the physical world worlds are
intimately connected and if the physical world
is finite in some strong sense then probably
the mathematical world is finite in certain
sense as well that's just my rough intuition in
any case it seems sort of almost metaphysical or
philosophical and uh and we should admit that
right we should admit that when we're talking
about questions like this it's on the borderline
of philosophy or metaphysics or or something or
religion perhaps even but aside from these sort of
philosophical or cosmological aspects there's more
mundane issues surrounding a sequence like 1 2 3
4 5 namely that in practice we only have a finite
amount of memory a finite amount of time a finite
amount of energy a finite amount of patience so
even though theoretically there might be you know
an infinite amount of these things available in
principle in practice the story is quite different
so in practice as you keep going in this sequence
inevitably no matter how powerful your Computing
devices are you will eventually have to start
slowing down the size of the numbers will slowly
overwhelm you and eventually you will grind to
a halt and there's not much you can do about
that you can extend the range a little bit by
increasing your computing power but that just
means that you're going to grind to a halt a
little bit later and this links I think to to the
to the ancient revered approach to something like
the integers that it's actually a sequence
that goes beyond our view and that extends
always Beyond us and that it's not really for us
to say what the whole thing amounts to we are not
in a position as I've mentioned quite a few times
before to grab the whole sequence and talk about
the whole sequence it always goes beyond our
view we're only capable of looking at absorbing
understanding a finite section of it at any given
time that's just the reality of the world in
which we live in and we should be cognizant of
that reality and not avoid our eyes to it this
discussion very important discussion between
the the differences between finite things and
infinite things is made cloudy by the grammatical
aspect of the words in English in English the word
finite and infinite are pretty close to each other
we're just adding this little prefix in in front
of the finite to make infinite suggesting that
we are just negating or taking the opposite of
the the meaning so the grammar is suggesting to
us that these words are somehow opposite and in
fact in practice that's often used okay but I
want to emphasize very very strongly that these
words are not opposites they are actually on quite
different levels of sophistication of difficulty
okay they are not at the same level and here are
some other examples to try to illustrate that uh
that idea so on the left hand side here I have a
a phrase which has a pretty clear regular meaning
that we can all more or less understand and over
here is some kind of flip side where we just stick
a little prefix in front of the word to S negate
its meaning but the point is that by doing this we
get a concept on this side which is a completely
different level from the one on this side so we're
going from reality over here to fiction or or
poetry over here so we're talking about finite
sequence to infinite sequence but suppose we talk
about a visible person okay I'm visible you're
visible and so on what about an invisible person
is that a concept I don't know I don't know any
invisible people probably you don't either just
by putting this little I in in front of the word
doesn't create a valid New Concept at least in my
opinion mortal cat Immortal cat what's an immortal
cat I don't know a terrestrial fish okay I think
we can understand what that is it's a fish that
swims in one of the oceans or lakes here on planet
Earth what's an extraterrestrial fish a fish that
swims on some ocean on some other planet maybe
a breakable wall yeah this wall is breakable how
about an unbreakable wall are there such things as
unbreakable walls I don't think so but I could be
wrong maybe on the side of the universe there's
an unbreakable wall that simply cannot be broken
stoppable Mouse well most mice are probably
stoppable one way or the other but what about
the concept of an Unstoppable Mouse like Mighty
Mouse maybe maybe Mighty Mouse is Unstoppable but
uh the concept it seems to be sort of often you
know never Neverland and this is the way I want
you to think about this difference here too right
going from finite sequence to infinite sequence we
are changing ballparks completely we cannot expect
that the logical structures and reasonings valid
for finite sequences extend to so-called infinite
sequences even if we were able to say what those
things really were so as you can see I'm not a
big fan of this word infinite in mathematics I
think it's a misused word and it uh brings a lot
of confusion into modern mathematics so I think
when we can we should try to look for alternate
terminology and so I'm going to propose that what
we currently talk about as an infinite sequence we
might introduce another phrase which I'm going to
call an on sequence and that's short for the term
ongoing sequence which to me more accurately and
honestly reflects the essential nature of these
so-called infinite sequences namely that they're
ongoing that they keep Ono at any stage AG we
can comprehend a finite amount and we can watch
the sequence increment and take over so that's
what's happening that's that's all there is we
can look at a certain finite amount of it and
we can see that it's continuing it's ongoing so
that's what it is to me it's an ongoing sequence
it's not necessarily infinite because I don't want
to make metaphysical assumptions about the end
of time or the uh the finiteness or otherwise
of the universe okay so to me this is a more
sensible downto Earth a solid way of thinking so
of course the question is still what do we mean
by an on sequence what is the actual definition
of such a thing and that's going to be still
a very very hard question that's still going
to be a question that we're going to be able to
answer only in stages you might be disappointed
that I'm not going to end this lecture by telling
you what an on sequence actually is it's a very
very difficult thing to do this in one blow
in fact it's possible as far as I'm concerned
but nevertheless we should have as a a motivator
that the sequences that are appearing in Sloan's
encyclopedia those at least most of them should
uh should qualify as on sequences so let's have
a look at uh some of these sequences and uh see
what happens with them so after the sequence or on
sequence of natural numbers the next most studied
and fascinating sequence is no doubt the sequence
of prime numbers which is a 40 in Sloan's list and
I guess the first fact there the The crucial fact
is one that was known to the ancient Greeks so
back to uid that uh that this sequence really is
an on sequence that it's not a finite sequence and
these days we would say that this is an infinite
sequence but uid said it in a rather different way
and it's very instructive to see how uid phrased
the theorem he said there are more primes than
found in any finite list of primes and by that
he meant that if you have any finite list of
primes then there's at least one other Prime
which is not in your list okay so there are more
primes than found in any finite list of primes the
modern mathematician might say well that means
that there's an infinite number of primes but
the ancient Greeks were more careful than a lot of
modern mathematicians as I've pointed out okay the
ancient Greeks were actually quite rigorous they
were concerned about logical Clarity and Purity
they didn't necessarily get everything right but
they they were concerned about it and this is a I
think a really good reflection of of that concern
the way this is stated so here's basically ucl's
proof suppose the primes in the finite list that
you've got are P1 P2 up to P little n so someone
says here is a list of primes there they are how
are you going to show that there's a prime that's
not in the list uclid says take this number let's
call it capital n obtained by multiplying all the
Primes in the list together P1 * P2 * P3 all the
way up to P little n and adding one so that's the
definition of n then this number n is either
prime or not if it is prime then it is not in
the list because this number is clearly bigger
than any of these numbers if it is not prime
well then it is divisible by some prime P because
uclid knows he established in his his book on uh
a number theory that every number is divisible
by a prime has a prime factor all right so call
that prime factor P but what can this prime
factor P be it cannot be in our list because
otherwise P would divide one in other words if
P was one of these guys here and P is a factor
of n then it's obviously also a factor of this
number because this number contains P somewhere
inside it and that would mean that it's a factor
of the difference between these two which is the
number one in other words P would divide one
that's not possible because p is a prime so
either way we get a new Prime either n itself
is a prime or it has a prime factor P which is
not on that list very beautiful classical proof
that shows that given any finite list of primes
there is a prime not on that list and that's our
justification for thinking saying that this is
an on sequence that we can always find a next
prime and now I want to raise perhaps a rather
mischievous question I want to ask the question
does this proof really work this is a course in
the foundations of mathematics and our job to look
carefully at arguments and to look at all aspects
of them and think well are there any holes here
are there any gaps are there any little weaknesses
where maybe some assumptions are occurring that
aren't completely clear and obvious well let's
let's think a little bit about prime numbers okay
currently in the year 2012 this is the largest
known prime number it's called a meren prime it's
2 to the 43112 609 minus1 that number is known to
be Prime and in fact that's been the largest
known prime for for four years now so finding
large primes is not at all easy it takes uh many
millions of computer hours to to find a prime like
this and to check that it's a prime it has around
12 million digits this number if you wrote it out
in Hindu Arabic form so this suggests something
right it suggests that well okay finding primes is
not so easy so people have been looking very hard
for a bigger Prime than this ID's theorem says
that there is a bigger Prime why can't we find
it why can't we just go through the motions of
the proof and find the next prime or find a bigger
Prime at least well there in fact are some hidden
assumptions in the proof subtle assumptions that
you might think are not worth worrying about but
they're worth pointing out in any case the first
assumption is that we can actually calculate this
number so what's the problem well suppose we could
list all the Primes up to this number P let's call
this P all right so U of course we do not have
any idea about uh most of the primes between
two and this number so most of the primes in that
range we do not know what they are but suppose we
could suppose we worked for a few thousand years
and we made a list of all the prime numbers from
2 3 5 all the way up to this number P okay and
then we started to mimic ukids proof so we want
to compute this number we need to take the product
of all these primes and add one that's how we're
going to find a new Prime are we able able to do
that well the answer is almost certainly no this
number is going to be too big for us to compute
in any meaningful way it's going to overwhelm
us and if we can't compute it then does the proof
really work the proof required us examining this
number but if we can't compute this number
can we even say that it exists okay some kind
of maybe metaphysical question but at least
there's some kind of possible difficulty here
in the computational aspect of of coming up with
this capital N number and there's also a second
assumption once we cooked up this number capital
N we said well either it's prime or it's not so
if it's not prime itself then we have to factor it
and find a prime factor how do we do that can we
in fact do that if this number is stupendously
large how do we Factor it yes the fundamental
theorem of arithmetic which we will talk about at
some point uh in this course uh asserts that we
can do this but is it really true given a number
that's that big can we in fact really Factor it
into prime factors we're going to see a little
bit later that that's also a questionable issue
all right so let's leave philosophical or semi
philosophical things aside and go to our next
sequence which is very concrete and down to earth
it's uh sequence a 00108 the Catan numbers and
here are the first ones 1 1 25 14 42 132 429 1430
4,862 16796 58 786 28,2 7429 and 2, 67444 and so
on I haven't specified the sequence yet have I
because the and so on leaves a big question mark
in your minds you don't know how the sequence
goes unless you already recognize this sequence
and this is a key difference between finite and
infinite sequences that the infinite sequences
cannot be specified by listing all the elements we
have to give some kind of rule or explanation of
where this sequence is coming from the remarkable
thing about this particular one is that there are
so many seemingly different and interesting
ways of defining or describing this sequence
perhaps the simplest is this formula it's
what you get when you take the binomial
coefficient 2 N choose n and divided by n + 1 so
in terms of factorials it's 2 N factorial / n + 1
factorial * n factorial and the N can go from 0 1
two and that's actually the zeroth one and that's
the first one so our indexing in this case starts
from zero I remind you that Z factorial is one by
definition okay there's a a lot of other ways of
describing this another interesting interpretation
is that it's the number of ways of inserting n
pairs of brackets in a word of n + one letters
so for example if n is equal to 3 then C3 = 5 0 1
2 3 right there and that five cor responds to the
five different ways of bracketing four objects
into pairs successively so here's AB bracketed
CD bracket all bracketed or you could bracket
the ab and then that with c and then that with
D or you get bracket the BC and then that with
a and then that with D or the BC and then that
with d and then that with a or the CD on that
side with the B and then with the a another
definition of c again is that it's the number of
walks with n left and N right steps which never
move left of the starting point so for example if
n is equal to 3 we're interested say in a fellow
who starts here and takes total of three steps to
the left and three steps to the right in various
orders so that at the end he's back to where he
started because he's taking three left steps and
three right steps so we know he back to where he
started but at no point has he ever moved left of
his starting point we might imagine that he's at
the edge of a cliff and if he moves left by one
step well then that's game over for him so those
walks are not allowed how many other walks can
he make here's an example of a walk he can make
this will be right right left right left left
represented by the this little pattern here okay
so that's one walk that he can take an admissible
walk consisting of three lefts and three rights
that get him back to where he started and which
don't allow him to fall off the cliff and if
you count how many there are you should find
that there are five such was good exercise for
you to to check that another interpretation of
the Catalan numbers which goes back to Oiler is
that it's the number of triangular subdivisions
of a convex n + 2 gone so sticking with n equal
3 again if n is three then n+ 2 is a fiveon or
Pentagon so here's a pentagon and here are the
five ways of dividing a pentagon into triangles
by lines from one vertex to another here it's
all rather symmetrical and it's sort of obvious
these are the only ones as a little exercise
you can uh try it with hexagons and show that
uh the number of triangular subdivisions of a
hexagon is 14 which is the the fourth Catalan
number this might suggest that U these numbers
should really be called Oiler numbers but if we
called Everything uh that Oiler discovered after
him then half of everything would be named after
Oiler it would be very confusing um but in fact
it's a little bit interesting that uh on the
internet one one finds that there was a Mongolian
mathematician who discovered these Catalan numbers
some years prior to to Oiler and I'm not that
familiar with uh how he discovered them and
and what the context was but that seems like a
an interesting uh interesting development now
there are many more interesting combinatorial
descriptions or definitions of of the Catalan
numbers but there are also some different kinds
of ways of approaching that sequence and one is
through a recursive definition that's going
to be an important idea for us so the idea of
a recursive definition is where you specify say
the first term in the sequence in this case one
and then you specify some rule that allows you
to generate next ones from previous ones in this
case the rule is this one here which harks back
to poly number multiplication it's that CN + 1
equals c0 CN so the product of C 0 is CN plus
the product of C1 with CN minus1 and so on all
the way up to the product of CN with C 0 so
what's happening here is we're taking pairs
starting with zero and n and then we're increasing
this one decreasing this one and then next stage
increasing this one decreasing this one and so
on until the final stage where we have n here
and zero here we take all those products and add
them together and that is CN + 1 so for example
let's say we've already computed c0 equal 1
C1 is 1 C2 = 2 C3 = 5 and you can check that
these numbers satisfy this rule then to get the
next one C4 this would be the rule we would take
c0 * C3 plus C1 * C2 plus C2 * C1 + C3 * c0 and
that amounts to 1 * 5 + 1 * 2 + 2 * 1 + 5 * 1 for
a total of 14 and that's the fourth Catalan number
now this kind of recursive definition that might
just be one of many in fact there's other kinds
of recursive definitions of the Catalin numbers
including this sort of determinantal recursive
definition which is also pretty interesting so
if you take a a determinant which is created by
on these sort of off diagonals here sticking the
various Catalan numbers so there's the zeroth
one there's the first one and the second one
the third one and there's the fourth one then
the determinant of that 3x3 Matrix turns out to
be one and that would mean that if you didn't know
this one already but you knew that the determinant
was one you could use that fact to compute that
that had to be 14 if you go up one size then the
Matrix becomes this so there's c0 C1 C2 C3 C4
C5 and there's C6 that would give you a formula
for C6 that gives you the formula for C4 C6 C2
and the even ones if you want the odd ones then
there's a kind of a variant of that where you
sort of shift everything up by one you sort of
forget about c0 and start with C1 in making your
Matrix so there's C1 along that off diagonal C2
C3 C4 and that gives you C5 that determinant is
also equal to one so that's kind of remark able
that these determinants uh have this property but
this is another way of defining if you like the
Catalan numbers recursively so you're getting
the idea that there's a lot of different ways
potentially of describing an on sequence that's
especially true of the Catalan sequence which is
very very rich but it illustrates the point that
with a finite sequence it's enough just to specify
the elements with an on sequence we can't specify
all of the elements we can specify a finite number
but we can't specify all of them but we need to
generate a rule or a function or an algorithm or
any one of those other sort of strange words but
the point is there may be a lot of different rules
a lot of different functions a lot of different
descriptions of the same on sequence which makes
pinning these things down so much more difficult
than for f finite sequences so this message is
important enough to to repeat it so let me just
spell it out very clearly all right so there's
a huge difference between a finite sequence such
as say S = 5 4 3 2 1 finished and an on sequence
say such as our Catalan numbers the former this
finite sequence is specified by the elements of
the sequence we don't need a rule we don't need
a formula we don't need a recursive definition we
just list the elements one by one until the end
and then we stop and that's how we specify the
sequence nothing more and nothing less anything
else is secondary however for a infinite sequence
or an on sequence things are completely different
the latter like the Catalan numbers are specified
by some rule or formula or recursion or algorithm
or computer program with many possible equivalent
descriptions you can see why there's such a
difference here because in order to make it
clear what an on sequence is we have to tackle
the meanings of these words we have to say well
what kinds of rules are we going to allow what
kinds of formulas are we going to allow what
kind of recursive definitions are are we going
to allow and which ones aren't we this is much
more problematic when we want to be careful
about things unfortunately modern mathematics
is not very willing to be careful about this
issue so the unwillingness to acknowledge this
crucial difference is a key weakness in modern
mathematics modern mathematics pretends that
finite sequence infinite sequence ah pretty
well the same thing except that the infinite
sequence just keeps on going no no no okay
it is much much much more complicated than
that that is a vast misrepresentation of The
Logical structure of things and unfortunately
that that unwillingness to acknowledge this
difference between finite and infinite creeps
into many other disciplines in mathematics
okay difference between a finite group and
an infinite group a huge huge difference
difference between a finite ring and an
infinite ring a huge difference etc etc many
many different examples we'll talk about them
later okay so this is very very important
uh point so we still haven't said what an
on sequence is or what an infinite sequence is
I'm not in position to tell you once and for
all what an on sequence or an infinite sequence
is and I don't think anybody is but next time
we're going to start with a very modest start
to try to set up a theory we're going to start
modestly by thinking about the simplest kinds
of on sequences and building up our notion of
on sequence slowly slowly carefully one at a
time this is going to create more structure and
perhaps more complexity than you might like but
hey that's the way mathematics wants to be so I
hope you'll join me for that I'm Norman
wildberger thanks for [Music] listening